docs: Add Binding to DataTemplates docs (#2292)
unoplatform/uno.extensions: doc/Learn/Markup/Binding-To-DataTemplates.md

    new ListView()
        .ItemsSource(() => vm.Items)
        .ItemTemplate<Item>(item =>
            new StackPanel()
                .Children(
                    new TextBlock().Text(() => item.Text),
                    new Button()
                        .Content("Delete")
                        .CommandParameter(() => item)
                        // Since we have access to the `page` and `vm` alias from the DataContext method
                        // We can take advantage of them and use them on our binding expression
                        .Command(x => x
                            .Source(page)
                            .DataContext()
                            .Binding(() => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
                        )
                )
        )
))
```

Alternatively, we could extract the `Button` into a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.

```csharp
...

.Children(
    new TextBlock()
        .Text(() => item.Text),
    CreateRemoveButton()
)
...

private Button CreateRemoveButton() => new Button()
    .Content("Delete")
    .CommandParameter(x => x

>         .RelativeSource<Button>(RelativeSourceMode.TemplatedParent)

Author: We have an inconsistency issue here:

**RelativeSource** as `TemplatedParent` works on Windows but not on Uno
**RelativeSource** as `Self` works on Uno but not on Windows

Should be fixed by https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/12732

@dansiegel @Xiaoy312 @agneszitte

Author: Uno issue: https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/issues/16940

Reviewer: Yes I believe it is how you would accomplish `CommandParameter="{Binding }"` when you are in an extracted method that doesn't have a reference to the datacontext

Author: Yes, it's to achieve what @kazo0 mentioned and in the next example we also mention the possiblity of doing `.CommandParameter(x => x.Binding())`.

---
uid: Uno.Extensions.Markup.BindToDataTemplate
---

# Binding to DataTemplates

> When working with DataTemplates, accessing data or commands from the parent context can be challenging. DataTemplates operate within their own scope, making it difficult to bind properties or trigger actions in the parent view model. This separation can lead to confusion, especially when dealing with nested templates and multiple levels of data context. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with `DataTemplate`s, accessing data or commands from the parent context can be challenging. `DataTemplate`s operate within their own scope, making it difficult to bind properties or trigger actions in the parent `DataContext`. This separation can lead to confusion, especially when dealing with nested templates and multiple levels of data context. 
```

> When working with `DataTemplate`s, accessing data or commands from the parent context can be challenging. `DataTemplate`s operate within their own scope, making it difficult to bind properties or trigger actions in the parent `DataContext`. This separation can lead to confusion, especially when dealing with nested templates and multiple levels of data context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When working with `DataTemplate`s, accessing data or commands from the parent context can be challenging. `DataTemplate`s operate within their own scope, making it difficult to bind properties or trigger actions from the parent `DataContext`. This separation can lead to confusion, especially when dealing with nested templates and multiple layers of data context.
```

> See the following example how we could access the command `RemoveItemCommand` defined inside the `ViewModel` class inside the ListView `ItemTemplate`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the following example of how we could access the command `RemoveItemCommand` defined inside the `ViewModel` class inside the ListView `ItemTemplate`.
```

> See the following example of how we could access the command `RemoveItemCommand` defined inside the `ViewModel` class inside the ListView `ItemTemplate`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the parent `DataContext` is the `ViewModel`. The `ViewModel` contains an `ICommand RemoveItemCommand`. The code demonstrates how to access that `ICommand` inside the `ItemTemplate` of the `ListView`.
```

> In the following example, the parent `DataContext` is the `ViewModel`. The `ViewModel` contains an `ICommand RemoveItemCommand`. The code demonstrates how to access that `ICommand` inside the `ItemTemplate` of the `ListView`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following example, the parent `DataContext` is the `ViewModel` which contains a `RemoveItemCommand`. The code demonstrates how to access that `ICommand` within the `ListView`'s `ItemTemplate`.
```

```csharp

> this.DataContext(new ViewModel(), (page, vm)
> 	=> page
> 	.Content(
>         new ListView()
>             .ItemsSource(() => vm.Items)
>             .ItemTemplate<Item>(item =>
>                 new StackPanel()
>                     .Children(

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this.DataContext(new ViewModel(), (page, vm)
    => page
    .Content(
        new ListView()
            .ItemsSource(() => vm.Items)
            .ItemTemplate<Item>(item =>
                new StackPanel()
                    .Children(
```

> this.DataContext(new ViewModel(), (page, vm)
>     => page
>     .Content(
>         new ListView()
>             .ItemsSource(() => vm.Items)
>             .ItemTemplate<Item>(item =>
>                 new StackPanel()
>                     .Children(
>                         new TextBlock()
>                             .Text(() => item.Text),
>                         new Button()
>                             .Content("Delete")
>                             .CommandParameter(() => item)
> 
>                             // Since we have access to the `page` and `vm` alias from the DataContext method
>                             // We can take advantage of them and use them on our binding expression
>                             .Command(x => x.Source(page)
>                                            .DataContext()
>                                            .Binding(() => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
>                             )
>                     )
>             )
>     )
> )

Reviewer 2: could use less indentation:
```suggestion
this.DataContext(new ViewModel(), (page, vm) => page.Content(
    new ListView()
        .ItemsSource(() => vm.Items)
        .ItemTemplate<Item>(item =>
            new StackPanel()
                .Children(
                    new TextBlock().Text(() => item.Text),
                    new Button()
                        .Content("Delete")
                        .CommandParameter(() => item)

                        // Since we have access to the `page` and `vm` alias from the DataContext method
                        // We can take advantage of them and use them on our binding expression
                        .Command(x => x
                            .Source(page)
                            .DataContext()
                            .Binding(() => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
                        )
                )
        )
))
```

```

> Alternatively we could extract the button instance to a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could extract the button instance to a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.
```

> Alternatively, we could extract the button instance to a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could extract the `Button` to a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.
```

> Alternatively, we could extract the `Button` to a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could extract the `Button` into a helper method and take advantage of the `RelativeSource` method to provide the `CommandParameter`.
```

```csharp
...

.Children(
    new TextBlock()
        .Text(() => item.Text),
    CreateButton()
)
...

private Button CreateButton()
    => new Button()
           .Content("Delete")
           .CommandParameter(x => x.RelativeSource<Button>(RelativeSourceMode.TemplatedParent)
                                   .Binding(btn => btn.DataContext)
            )
           .Command(x => x

>                         // Since we we don't have access to the `page` alias here (as we have on the previous example)
>                         // We need to set `this` as the source

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                        // Since we we don't have access to the `page` alias here (as we have in the previous example)
                        // We need to set `this` as the source
```

> private Button CreateButton()
>     => new Button()
>            .Content("Delete")
>            .CommandParameter(x => x.RelativeSource<Button>(RelativeSourceMode.TemplatedParent)
>                                    .Binding(btn => btn.DataContext)
>             )
>            .Command(x => x
>                         // Since we don't have access to the `page` alias here (as we have in the previous example)
>                         // We need to set `this` as the source
>                         .Source(this)
>                         // Here we specify the DataContext type so that we can access the ViewModel alias in the Binding method
>                         .DataContext<MainViewModel>()
>                         .Binding(vm => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
>             );

Reviewer 2: dont align `.ChainedMethod` to its previous chain, align them to the indentation level:
```suggestion
private Button CreateButton() => new Button()
   .Content("Delete")
   .CommandParameter(x => x
       .RelativeSource<Button>(RelativeSourceMode.TemplatedParent)
       .Binding(btn => btn.DataContext)
    )
   .Command(x => x
        // Since we don't have access to the `page` alias here (as we have in the previous example)
        // We need to set `this` as the source
        .Source(this)
        // Here we specify the DataContext type so that we can access the ViewModel alias in the Binding method
        .DataContext<MainViewModel>()
        .Binding(vm => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
    );
```

```

> Since the `CommandParameter` we're providing it's the `Item` from the List, we can simplify it by using the Xaml equivalent as `{Binding .}` that in C# Markup is `(x => x.Binding())`. So the code would look like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the `CommandParameter` we're providing is the `Item` from the List, we can simplify it by using the Xaml equivalent as `{Binding .}` that in C# Markup is `(x => x.Binding())`. So the code would look like:
```

> Since the `CommandParameter` we're providing is the `Item` from the List, we can simplify it by using the Xaml equivalent as `{Binding .}` that in C# Markup is `(x => x.Binding())`. So the code would look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the `CommandParameter` we're providing is the `DataContext` of the `ItemTemplate` from the `ListView`, we can simplify it by using the XAML equivalent of `{Binding .}`. In C# Markup this is `(x => x.Binding())`:
```

> Since the `CommandParameter` we're providing is the `DataContext` of the `ItemTemplate` from the `ListView`, we can simplify it by using the XAML equivalent of `{Binding .}`. In C# Markup this is `(x => x.Binding())`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that `CommandParameter` is the `DataContext` of the `ListView.ItemTemplate`, we can simplify it by using the XAML equivalent of `{Binding .}`. In C# Markup this is `(x => x.Binding())`:
```

```csharp

> private Button CreateButton()
>     => new Button()
>            .Content("Delete")
>            .CommandParameter(x => x.Binding())
>            .Command(x => x.Source(this)
>                           .DataContext<MainViewModel>()
>                           .Binding(vm => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
>             );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
private Button CreateButton() => new Button()
    .Content("Delete")
    .Command(x => x.Source(this)
        .DataContext<MainViewModel>()
        .Binding(vm => vm.RemoveItemCommand)
    )
    .CommandParameter(x => x.Binding());
```

Reviewer 2: could also rename to CreateRemoveButton~

```

> To know more about the `Source` and `RelativeSource` usage in C# Markup access our [Source and Relative Source](xref:Uno.Extensions.Markup.SourceUsage) docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about `Source` and `RelativeSource` usages in C# Markup, refer to the [Source and Relative Source](xref:Uno.Extensions.Markup.SourceUsage) documentation.
```
